---
abbreviation: A1
title: How the Indian came (first telling)
---
\trs
\tln

wetkšˊ husˊ na·nča·kamankšˊ wetkˊ hi hokmiʔiˊ.
He left his brothers.

\trs  kunˊ ču·gšˊ ču·gšˊ, še·nink hupˊ hi ničwiʔiˊ.
\txn  kun ču·gš ču·gš še·nink hup hi ničwiʔi
\tln  He went and went till he came to the edge of a pond.

wetkšˊ we še·ninkˊ hi ničwinkišˊ, weykˊ hi kišutiʔiˊ.
When he got to the edge of the pond, he swam it.

wetkšˊ hesigen ču·gšˊ hi ničwiʔiˊ.
Then he went (on) again and came (again) to the edge (of a body of water).

tutkˊ te·tiʔiˊ, ha še·nišˊ nenču· ʔatiˊ nenšwičukiˊ.
He said, “This pond is too big for me to cross”.

wetkšˊ siksinkˊ his he·čtiʔiˊ.
Then an eagle met him.

we siksinkˊ ni wopmiʔiˊ, him haksigam neˊ, ʔamǯa·šiˊ sankiˊ.
The eagle asked, “You young man, what are you doing there?”

ʔiškˊ ku· ketankiˊ ʔap ni·gšikiˊ.
“I have come to the water’s side.

ha še·nišˊ hi nenču· ʔatiˊ kišučukiˊ.
This pond is too big for me to swim”.

nenšwi gihtkš teˋ, kunuguˊ we siksink hišˊ ni wopmiʔiˊ.
“Do you want to cross it?”, that eagle asked.

tutkˊ we siksiˊ hi natmaʔiˊ, hi nenšwagaˊ, tewe·š nenču· ʔatiˊ ha še·nišˊ.
He told the eagle, “I want to cross it, but this pond is too big”.

he·čpičukˊ, gihču·šˊ, we siksink hišˊ hi te·tiʔiˊ.
“I’ll help you, if you wish,” the eagle said.

gihkiteˊ hikinˊ, he·čpi ka·kwakiču·šˊ.
“I do wish it, if you can help me”.

tutkˊ kunuguˊ we siksinkˊ kap gaptkˊ we še·ni waʔankˊ hi pešiʔiˊ.
Then they say the eagle took him up and flew toward the opposite side of the pond.

pa·kinekiču·šˊ, ku· kiˊ hi nikinčukingˊ.
“If I get tired, I’ll have to drop you into the water,” (said the eagle).

hesigen ku· kiˊ hi nikintkiču·šˊ, kišučukˊ.
“If you drop me back into the water I’ll swim”.

wetkš we siksink hišˊ hesigenˊ ʔapš heyštiʔiˊ.
Then the eagle picked him up again.

wetkš ʔap nenčupiˊ.
Then he got him across.

weyǯi·gš kunuguˊ panš pinikankšˊ siksišˊ geti gayšnaʔaˊ.
They say that is why Indians do not kill eagles.

siksiˊ geču·šˊ, ʔam keysmankiˊ hihčuyiˊ.
If one kills an eagle, he will get into some trouble.

weyǯi·gš huguˊ panš pinikankˊ ha·ktišˊ ʔap nemnaʔaˊ.
That is how Indians came across (to) this side.

ka·kwaki ganˊ ʔašt ʔuči·gšˊ panš neˊ kap nacpikminaʔaˊ, tewe·š weytuguˊ we ʔasišˊ hankˊ ʔap nenšwiʔiˊ.
I do not know how people started up, but that is how the man came over here.

ʔuč hiš ganˊ ka·kwiʔiˊ ʔašt ʔuči·g panš kap nacpikmiʔiˊ.
Nobody knows how people started up.

weydšinˊ da·tkˊ.
That is all now.
